---
published: false
---
## Research Report on a Cybersecurity Incident
This is a report on the United States Office of Personnel Management (OPM) data breach of 2015. 

## Introduction
In 16th-Century England, Queen Elizabeth I (a protestant) was under constant threat from the Catholics. To keep her safe, she appointed the spymaster [Sir Francis Walsingham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Walsingham). He was said to have a vast spy network all over Europe. Agents infiltrated rebel groups, merchant fleets and even posed as catholic priests. Walsingham’s spies would report back information such as names of rebels and potential plots.  Spying carried out by humans like this is known in the intelligence community as [HUMINT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_intelligence_(intelligence_gathering)). With the introduction of the telegraph and radio communications in the late 19th, early 20th Centuries, intelligence agencies adapted and developed signals intelligence [(SIGINT)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signals_intelligence) to intercept and decode these communications. 

Fast forward to the 21st-Century, and today, SIGINT is the primary method of intelligence gathering. Furthermore, we have seen the development of offensive capabilities by nation-states that break into computers over the internet to steal sensitive or classified information. An early example of this new kind of espionage was the Moonlight Maze attack in 1998-1999. Russia was attributed to this attack whereby hackers broke into networks at the US Airforce,  National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and universities. Russia reportedly stole military installation maps, hardware designs and other sensitive information (Rid, 2012, p. 15).

This report will discuss the data breach at the US Office of Personnel Management (OPM), which occurred between 2012 to 2015 and has been attributed to [China’s Unit 61398](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PLA_Unit_61398) (part of the People’s Liberation Army), also known as APT1 [(Mandiant, 2013)](https://web.archive.org/web/20130219155150/http://intelreport.mandiant.com/Mandiant_APT1_Report.pdf). This report will also characterise the type of cyber-conflict the OPM attack falls into based on academic definitions. This report will summarise the events relating to the attack with some discussion of attribution and tradecraft. It will discuss the motivation and consequences of the attack, the technical and political response to the attack, and the directive and technical security controls that could have been put in place to prevent or mitigate the attack.

## The OPM Data Breach

On the 4th of June 2015, OPM announced the theft of 4.2 million federal government personnel records. The following month, on the 9th of July, OPM announced that there had been a further theft of 21.5 million sensitive personal records stolen in a separate incident. Of this theft, 19.7 million records of individuals that applied for background checks, 1.8 million records of spouses or co-habitants of background check applicants, and 5.6 million fingerprint records [(US Office of Personnel Management, 2015)](https://www.opm.gov/cybersecurity/cybersecurity-incidents/). The announcements in the summer of 2015 were the culmination of a series of targeted attacks and thefts which had been carried out as far back as 2012. 

## The Type of Cyber-Conflict

The OPM breach would be characterised as a cyberwar incident by many academics such as [Whyte & Mazanec (2018, p. 99)](https://amzn.to/2ZizJWm). Cyberwar meaning a _“discrete episode … [of] two politically recognisable entities engaged in hostile activities against one another entirely via cyberspace.”_ Using the more conservative definition of “cyberwar” by Rid (2012, p.20), the incident would only be characterised as cyber-espionage. Cyber-espionage is “an attempt to penetrate an adversarial system for purposes of extracting sensitive or protected information”, and according to Rid, the most common type of political cybersecurity incident.

## Why OPM? The Motivation and Consequences of the Attack

OPM is a US Federal Government agency that provides services to other Federal Government agencies for human capital management leadership, benefits and vetting for security clearance (About Us - OPM.Gov, n.d.). OPM performs background investigations for all prospective government employees, contractors and even federal judges and US Department of Defense personnel. Among the stolen data, the most sensitive was the database from the Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing application (e-QIP). This application stored what was known as Standard Forms (SF) 85, 85P, and 86. These were correspondingly applications for non-sensitive positions, public trust positions, and national security positions (Finklea et al., 2015, p. 4). The SF-86 forms being personnel applications for the highest security clearances in government contain an applicant’s most personal details such as home addresses of the past ten years, home addresses of relatives, employment history (Committee on Oversight and Government Reform US House of Representatives [COGR], 2016, p. vi). The form also included a 127-page questionnaire about the applicant’s finances, illegal or controlled substance usage, relationships and sexual behaviour. The e-QIP data also contained applicant lie detector results and notes (Koerner, 2016).
With such a trove of information on personnel with access to government secrets, it is plain to see why OPM was a high-value target for China’s Unit 61398. OPM was a primary target, which explains why there were a series of break-ins dating as far back as July 2012 (since attributed to APT1), with the agency unable to adequately defend itself, which ultimately led to the major incident in 2015 of having 21.5 million records stolen. 
Access to OPM’s data is extraordinarily beneficial for foreign intelligence, espionage and counter-intelligence. In the reports and analysis post-incident, experts hypothesised on the terrible things China could do or had done with the data, such as:
-	Use the data for spear-phishing campaigns (Finklea et al., 2015, p. 4).
-	Build a database of federal employees to help identify US officials and their roles. (Finklea et al., 2015, p. 4)
-	Help them identify clandestine and covert officers and operations (Finklea et al., 2015, p. 4).
-	Use the data for spy-recruiting purposes, knowing who has access to what, where they lived, and their financial circumstances (Koerner, 2016).
-	3-D printing stolen fingerprint data and have foreign operatives use them to bypass biometric security systems (Koerner, 2016).
-	Alter existing personnel files or create fictitious personnel that could go undetected (Finklea et al., 2015, p. 4).
Although the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had said that their personnel data was not involved in the data breach as they maintain separate systems (Auerbach, 2015), personnel were recalled from the US Embassy in China in 2015 after the breach. Experts say this was because if China could identify all embassy staff involved in the breach, anyone not identified could be exposed as an intelligence agent (Nakashima & Goldman, 2015). 

Timeline of the Data Breach(s)
Although the larger of the two significant exfiltrations was traced back to a social engineering attack where an attacker posed as a contractor to have credentials reset, the “exact details of how and when the attackers gained and established persistence… [in the 2012 attack] is not entirely clear.” (COGR, 2016, p. vii). OPM not knowing when they were compromised was indicative of poor cyber-hygiene and inadequate security technologies.  The timeline in Table 1 below provides a summary of key events in the OPM breach.
