---
published: false
---
# Defining Cyberwarfare and Cyberterrorism Essay
## Introduction
Since time immemorial, humans have waged war.  War against each other and possibly against [our humanoid ancestors too](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20201102-did-neanderthals-go-to-war-with-our-ancestors). War is an intrinsic part of being human. It is little wonder that new technology drives motivation for advantage in warfare. Just as military dominance in the 19th-Century meant conquering the seas, and air superiority won wars in the 20th-Century, ruling cyberspace is strategic for the 21st-Century. Not surprisingly, applying age-old concepts of war and terrorism to new realms is controversial. This essay reviews various definitions of cyberwarfare and cyberterrorism, contrasting them with each other and comparing these definitions with uses by governments and the public. 
The words cyberwarfare (also written as 'cyber warfare' or cyber-warfare) and cyberterrorism (also 'cyber terrorism', cyber-terrorism), according to the Google Books Project, were [first mentioned in the 1970s](https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=cyberterrorism%2Ccyber-terrorism%2Ccyber+terrorism&year_start=1800&year_end=2019&corpus=26&smoothing=3&direct_url=t1%3B%2Ccyberterrorism%3B%2Cc0%3B.t1%3B%2Ccyber%20-%20terrorism%3B%2Cc0%3B.t1%3B%2Ccyber%20terrorism%3B%2Cc0#t1%3B%2Ccyberterrorism%3B%2Cc0%3B.t1%3B%2Ccyber%20-%20terrorism%3B%2Cc0%3B.t1%3B%2Ccyber%20terrorism%3B%2Cc0). The usage of the words did not become common till the late 1990s. Interestingly, the word 'cyberterrorist' has always been the most popular term among the variations, whilst 'cyber warfare' remains the most popular among its variations.  For simplicity, this essay will use the compound word forms for both terms. 
## Cyberwarfare
Among academics, the definition of when a cyberattack amounts to cyberwarfare is contentious. At one end of the spectrum, [Rid (2012) argues](https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2011.608939) that cyberwarfare has not occurred in the past and is unlikely to happen in the future. He defines war in precise terms, borrowing from Carl Von Clausewitz, a 19th-Century Prussian military theorist. There must be three elements for an action to be considered an act of war by a state. Firstly, there must be aggressive or defensive actions of a violent character, 'an act of war is always potentially or actually lethal'. Second, an act of war must be instrumental, that is, a means to an end. The end meaning rendering the opponent defenceless or forcing the opponent to submit to the attacker. Thirdly, an act of war must be political in nature, with attributable actions.

Rid prefers to characterise cyberattacks as either sabotage, espionage or subversion. He opines that although cyberwarfare is possible, it is currently science fiction. In his opinion, calling cyberattacks cyberwarfare is at most metaphorical, the same way we use the term ["the war on obesity"](https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2011.608939) or the ["war on cancer"](https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2011.608939).

Contrastingly, Rid's colleague, [Stone (2013)](https://doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2012.730485), argues against war requiring lethal force and the need for attribution. Aggressive actions do not require lethal force but only "the application of force to produce violent effects". Additionally, Stone introduces modern concepts of western liberal war, which aim to minimise the loss of human life by inhibiting an enemy's means of waging war. This is illustrated with the example of the US Air Force raids on German ball-bearing factories in World War II, arguing that war is also waged on objects. In rejecting Rid's view that destroying things can only amount to sabotage, Stone argues that war and sabotage are not mutually exclusive. Stone also argues that the new cyber domain could mean that future wars are fought without attribution.  

In defining cyberwarfare in law, legal scholars seek to interpret the term 'use of force' in Article 2(4) of the UN Charter. The international legal community's consensus is that the threshold for force only applies to cyberattacks where the result has the same effects as a kinetic force. That is, there is physical injury, death or destruction of property (Tully, 2012).  This interpretation aligns more with Stone's definition, meaning that cyberattacks such as:
- the Stuxnet virus in 2005 (attributed to Israel) which sabotaged Iran's nuclear enrichment program by creating a virus that modified the SCADA systems to destroy centrifuges (Tully, 2012); and
- the Siberian pipeline explosion in 1982 (if it did happen) caused by faulty pump values which the US Intelligence rigged via the SCADA system (Rid, 2012); would qualify as cyberwarfare.
 
The news media use the term cyberwarfare and cyberattack almost interchangeably. A recent example of this is the hacking of Parliament House emails (Harris, 2019). Whilst academics would consider this as cyber-espionage

